Basic authentication involves two major steps authentication and authorization.
Authentication validates the identity of a client, whereas authorization determines what they have
access to.
In this lesson, you will understand the process of basic auth.
Before we get into it, let us discuss the composition of an HTTP request, which is simply composed
of a header and a body.
The header contains colon separated field value pairs that describe their request.
With regards to headers, the only field we actually care about is authorization, which we need for
basic auth.
The body is payload that you're sending.
The API usually included in post and put requests.
As you have seen countless times before, the API uses the payload to create or update resources.
All right, now let's discuss the process of basic auth and step one.
The API requires authentication before processing a request.
For example, our Contacts API ensures that only authenticated users may invoke the post operation.
In step two, the client's HTTP request needs to include credentials in the header.
The header will contain an authorisation field.
There you have to input your username and password in order to authenticate your username and password
will be prefaced by the word basic.
And now let's see that your username is rain and your password is learn the part before being sent off.
They will be encoded in a character set that is known to every computer system.
This encoding is called base 64.
And step three is authentication, where spring security validates the identity of the client.
Spring security is going to validate the credentials from the header against its records.
If there is no match, it's going to send back an error code of 401.
You will remember that any 400 status means or indicates a faulty request.
In this case, the client sent invalid authentication credentials and that's 401.
But if there happens to be a match, if spring security is able to effectively validate the credentials
against its records, then it will move to step four authorization.
Authorization determines what the client that we just authenticated has access to.
So after the user has been authenticated, we have verified their identity.
Spring security will determine if the client is authorized to make that request.
Let's assume that our API has protected the post operation such that it can only be performed by clients
with a role of admin.
But our client, which we just authenticated, has a role of user, so they are not authorized to perform
this operation.
In this case, spring security sends back a status code of 403, which means forbidden the client.
Although they were authenticated successfully, they do not have the authority to perform the requested
operation.
Now.
On the other hand, if the authenticated clients role happens to be admin, then they are authorized
to perform the requested operation.
And that's really it.
The post operation works.
They created some type of resource and it sends back a 200 status code 201 in this case.
So to recap, basic authentication involves two major steps authentication and authorization.
Authentication validates the identity of the client, and after the client has been authenticated,
authorization determines if the client should be granted access.